[Crowd cheering]
On the flats
and downhills
and then see how the pain
is handling.
If it's any pain
or if it's light
or strong.
I see from there.
So the
preparation was
kind of okay
until it wasn't.
[Crowd chanting]
Like, I wanted to
be there first
because it's a
race that I love.
Like, first time
I raced was 2007.
It really changed
like how I perceived
myself
into the sport.
Winning there,
winning the
Skyrunning
World Series.
I saw that I
could have some
kind of future
in the sport.
And the experience there
is just so
incredible
with...
Like, you really
feel that it's a
village race.
All the people living in the village
that organize that race
because they want
to show like how
proud they are
about those
mountains and
those trails.
And that hasn't
changed even if
now it's kind of
one of the most
famous
races in trail.
And it's still
the same race.
The last weeks,
like, I started
to struggle more
with the IT band.
But I was anyway
saying, okay,
I try to give my best.
And in the race,
actually, I felt
good in the
uphills.
At the moment
that the slope
was flat and
downhill,
I was feeling
kind of weird,
muscularly.
Like, I couldn't
really control
this leg and then
started to be
painful.
And then I just
enjoyed it.
Like, I was
taking it easy
and just sharing
with the people
and kind of
thanking all the
spectators that
they had been
there for the 12
years I have been
racing and
enjoying
the crowd.
Like, normally we
go like full gas
and we can't
really
enjoy deeply.
And this year I
like
I enjoy the race.
Perfect.
Yeah, the day
after after
Zegama, actually,
I went to take a MRI
I have been
avoiding kind of
these MRIs
for years because
well, since
2006, when
I broke my patella here
like I had
some big
difference of strength
in the legs and
always kind of
some pain
in this knee.
But for the past
three years, I
have been feeling
pretty much pain
on always either
in the knee or
in the TFL or in
the hip here.
So it's always
been something around here.
The last weeks
before the Zegama
was also feeling
pretty much pain
in the external
side of the knee.
And then at Zegama
I just
started the race
to see how I would feel.
But after a while
while, it was
obvious that,
yeah, flat and
downhill, it was
painful.
So I decided
finally to take
the MRI and they
could see the
external
meniscus
It's broken and
had some edemas
in the fat part,
the cartilage.
It's very thin
and then some
more inflammation
in the tendon.
So we decided to
stop running for
a few weeks.
I just took some
bike and some
uphill to try to
get rid of
the edema.
It's a very short
time because it's
only like four
weeks to
Western States and
I'm not
running at all.
But the plan is
to get rid of the
edema and then to
do two good weeks
before
Western States
So it's a bit of
a gamble, but we
are here to play.
I'm always
optimistic on
that side.
Like I always
think, yeah, it
can go well.
For the first
time in three
years, now that I
have been resting
a bit more,
I'm able to go
down the stairs
without pain in
this knee.
So that's a
pretty good sign
that it can go
well, but I
haven't started
running yet.
So it's
hard to say.
The relation with
pain, you always
have pain
somewhere.
I think if you're
training a lot,
it's kind of a
part of the game
because you are
always pushing to
those limits.
It's a bit part
of the game, like
how to
manage pain.
I had for many years
some kind
of pain in
this side.
I think it's also
personalities.
Some people don't
like to race at
all with any
discomfort
or pain.
I don't
care much.
I think
I have been
racing injured
many times
and I just try to go with it
and see.
Many times
mentally you can
pass
through the pain.
I don't know if
it's healthy or
worth it, but if
it doesn't
get worse,
I think it's just
part of the game.
So yeah, I think
you just get
used to it.
It's much better
than before
Zegama
Before Zegama,
I was unable to
do a squat
with this.
Like, for example, that's
That's something
I haven't been able
to do for
at least one half year.
A squat with the
left leg.
Taking the MRI
and saying,
Okay, you need
to do something
with that. It's
probably good.
I feel like at
this point of my
career, I don't
feel that I need
to win the races,
or that it's been
more on the...
For example, now
after Zegama,
like, okay,
I say, okay, it's
not an ideal
situation for
Western states.
But that's the
fun thing of the
challenge.
It's like, okay,
can we perform
well at Western
States with like
four weeks
without running
and two weeks of
running?
That's what
excites me more
than like if I
had a perfect
preparation.
Sport, it's about
accepting that
it's not a linear thing
and that
injuries happen
and accidents
happen and things
like that.
So it's about
finding the best
of every
situation.
I would say it's
performance
goals, but
without the
result as the
only marker.
And seeing with
age, I see that
still many of my
systems are
improving,
like my metabolic
system, my
lymphatic system.
But the
neuromuscular
system is
struggling a lot
because with age,
it's never
getting better.
And also, I'm not
the one that
really takes care
of that.
So it's fun to
see how the body
is evolving on
different ways.
So first, a week
after Zegama,
I didn't do any
running.
I was
just biking.
And now the
second week, I
started to do
some active
running, pretty steep
25 degrees.
And so far, it's
feeling good.
What I feel the
most is that
my left leg, the
muscle starts to operate
that the tone in
the quads is much
better than
before Zegama.
So that's a
good thing.
I still, I will
wait one more
week to start
running on the on
the flat and
downhills
and then see how
the pain is
handling.
If it's any pain,
if it's slight or
strong, I'll see
from there.
How are you feeling?
With only 4 weeks
It's short.
I mean, I'm not
running and it's
four weeks.
Like it's just a
gamble, I would
say that we, with
Jesús, we're
thinking
about like,
okay, how we can
make it possible.
I have the
metabolic
endurance fitness
but
yeah, how we can
build the
neoromuscular
fitness in the
last two or
three weeks.
So yeah, I mean,
like we will try.